docs: add memory shortage troubleshooting guide (#11148)
VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics: docs/victoriametrics/Troubleshooting.md

These are the most common reasons for slow data ingestion in VictoriaMetrics:

> 1. [Memory shortage](#memory-shortage) for the given amounts of [active time series](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-an-active-time-series).

Reviewer: Please use absolute links instead of relative links

Author: Done, switched the links to absolute, including this one.

   and [indexdb](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/#indexdb). The OS caches recently
   read parts of these files in free RAM and reclaims them under memory pressure.
   `process_resident_memory_file_bytes` shows how much of them is currently resident for the process.

Before tuning and troubleshooting memory issues,
see [Best practices](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/bestpractices/#memory)
for memory configuration guidance. Be sure that `GOMEMLIMIT` is not set,
and that the [VPA](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler) is not used for `vmstorage` pods.

### Memory signals

These metrics describe how a component uses memory. See [how to monitor VictoriaMetrics](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/#monitoring)
to set up scraping and the Grafana dashboards that show them.
None of them means a shortage on its own; read them together in [Memory shortage patterns](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#memory-shortage-patterns).

- `process_resident_memory_anon_bytes` / `vm_available_memory_bytes` - anonymous memory (caches plus Go heap)

>   as a share of the available memory. This memory can't be reclaimed back by OS.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `process_resident_memory_anon_bytes / vm_available_memory_bytes` - a share of available memory occupied by the process (caches, internal buffers, Go heap). This memory can't be reclaimed back by OS.
```

- `process_resident_memory_file_bytes` - the OS page cache for the component's on-disk data,
  currently resident for the process. Reclaimable by the OS.

- `process_pressure_memory_waiting_seconds_total`, `process_pressure_memory_stalled_seconds_total` -

>   [PSI](https://docs.kernel.org/accounting/psi.html): time tasks were stalled waiting for memory reclaim.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  [PSI](https://docs.kernel.org/accounting/psi.html): amount of time tasks were stalled waiting for memory reclaim.
```

  Populated only on Linux hosts with PSI support.

- `vm_cache_size_bytes / vm_cache_size_max_bytes` (per `type`, e.g., `storage/tsid`) -
  how full each in-process cache is.

> - `vm_slow_row_inserts_total` / `vm_rows_added_to_storage_total` -

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- `vm_slow_row_inserts_total / vm_rows_added_to_storage_total` -
```

  share of ingested rows that missed the `storage/tsid` cache ([slow inserts](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#slow-data-ingestion)).

- `increase(vm_new_timeseries_created_total[24h]) / vm_cache_entries{type="storage/hour_metric_ids"}` -
  the [churn rate](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-high-churn-rate):
  new series created over a day relative to the
  [active time series](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-an-active-time-series).

> - `process_major_pagefaults_total` - rate of pages read from disk (page-cache misses, refaults, or swap-in).

Reviewer: the signals aren't looking consistent here. 
Some signals are just metric names, like `process_pressure_memory_waiting_seconds_total`.
Some are expressions that interpret metrics, like `increase(vm_new_timeseries_created_total[24h])`.

On L:415  `process_major_pagefaults_total` is mentioned as `rate of pages read`, while it is just a metric name. 

On L:417 you mentioning a dashboard panel instead of metric name or expression. 

I'd prefer some consistency here: metric names, expressions or dasbhoard panels.

- `go_memstats_heap_inuse_bytes` and the `CPU spent on GC` panel - the Go heap working set and the CPU cost of garbage collection.

#### Out of memory errors

An out-of-memory (OOM) kill is the strongest sign of a memory shortage, but the process cannot report it:
the process is already dead. Detect the kill from outside the process:

- Kubernetes: a container restart with reason `OOMKilled` in the pod events (`kubectl describe pod`).
- Linux hosts: the kernel OOM killer log in `dmesg` or `journalctl`, with the `oom_score` for the killed process.
- Container runtime logs record the same kill from the runtime side.

To prevent recurrence, resolve the underlying shortage (see [How to fix memory issues](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#how-to-fix-memory-issues)).

### Memory shortage patterns

There are three patterns of memory shortage:

1. **The cache cannot hold the active series (cache-bound shortage).** The `storage/tsid` cache is full:
   `vm_cache_size_bytes{type="storage/tsid"}` is close to `vm_cache_size_max_bytes{type="storage/tsid"}`, and slow inserts stay high.

>    Most slow inserts come from `storage/tsid` cache misses, on new series or on already-known active series.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   Slow inserts come from `storage/tsid` cache misses: it is either new unseen before series or series that were pushed out from the overutilized cache due to insufficient memory.
```

>    If they stay above 5% of ingested rows during a stable window without restarts or rerouting,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   If slow inserts stay above 5% during a stable window without restarts or rerouting,
```

   There is no fixed normal value, so compare against the component's own stable history.
   A `process_resident_memory_anon_bytes / vm_available_memory_bytes` ratio that keeps rising leaves little headroom
   and may lead to an [OOM kill](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#out-of-memory-errors).
   A single heavy query can spike the heap on its own: if it has to select and process millions of unique time series,
   VictoriaMetrics keeps some per-series data in memory while the query runs. Find it with the
   [query tracer](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#query-tracing),
   log slow queries with [query execution stats](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/query-stats/),
   bound it with [resource usage limits](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#resource-usage-limits),
   and see [how to optimize PromQL and MetricsQL queries](https://valyala.medium.com/how-to-optimize-promql-and-metricsql-queries-85a1b75bf986).
   If heap growth correlates with query or ingestion load, it is workload-driven.

>    If the heap grows regardless of load, suspect a memory leak, collect a heap profile, and [file a bug report](https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics/issues/new).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   VictoriaMetrics keeps some per-series data in memory while the query runs. 
    See how to find expensive and slow queries [here](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#slow-queries). Prevent expensive queries from execution with [resource usage limits](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#resource-usage-limits).
   If heap growth correlates with query or ingestion load, it is workload-driven.
   If the heap grows regardless of load, suspect a memory leak, collect a heap profile, and [file a bug report](https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics/issues/new).
```

>    If heap growth correlates with query or ingestion load, it is workload-driven.
>    If the heap grows regardless of load, suspect a memory leak, collect a heap profile, and [file a bug report](https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics/issues/new).
> 
> 1. **The OS page cache is too small (I/O-bound shortage).** The main signal is a consistently high
>    `process_major_pagefaults_total` rate: the component's data and `indexdb` no longer fit the page cache,
>    so it reads them from disk and query latency grows. `process_resident_memory_file_bytes` drops as the OS
>    evicts these file pages. Swap causes the same symptoms, so keep it disabled on `vmstorage` and
>    single-node hosts (see [Swap](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/bestpractices/#swap)).
>    Add memory according to
>    [capacity planning](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. **The OS page cache is too small (I/O-bound shortage).** The main signal is a consistently high
   `process_major_pagefaults_total` rate: frequently accessed data no longer fit the page cache,
   so component reads it from the disk, which is orders of magnitude slower. `process_resident_memory_file_bytes` drops as the OS
   evicts these file pages. Swap causes the same symptoms, so keep it disabled on `vmstorage` and
   single-node hosts (see [Swap](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/bestpractices/#swap)).  Do not collocate vmstorages on the same physical instance, as it could lead to page cache thrashing.
   Allocate available memory according to
   [capacity planning](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning).
```

PSI is an additional confirmation signal: a rising `process_pressure_memory_*` value indicates that the kernel is reclaiming memory for the cgroup.
Where PSI is unavailable, rely on the per-pattern signals above.

### How to fix memory issues

After distinguishing the shortage from normal high memory utilization, and if it persists,
you can use the approaches below to resolve it:

- Reduce the number of [active time series](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-an-active-time-series)
  or the [churn rate](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-high-churn-rate) -
  see [Slow data ingestion](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#slow-data-ingestion).
- Add more memory by scaling vertically or horizontally - see capacity planning for
  [single-node VictoriaMetrics](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning)
  and the [cluster version](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/cluster-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning).
  Spare memory also absorbs workload spikes that would otherwise OOM a component running near its limit.

> - Remove command-line flags whose impact you do not clearly understand. Improper flags can raise
>   memory usage and lead to OOM crashes. In particular, do not change
>   [cache sizes](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#cache-tuning);
>   add more memory instead.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Remove command-line flags whose impact you do not clearly understand. Improper flags can raise
  memory usage and lead to OOM crashes. In particular, do not change
  [cache sizes](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#cache-tuning);
  add more memory instead.
 - Set sane [resource usage limits](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#resource-usage-limits) to protect components;
```

  which explains how to identify and optimize slow queries.

## Memory shortage

High memory utilization alone does not indicate a shortage.
A VictoriaMetrics component can operate normally under high memory utilization,
but it is recommended to keep [at least 50% of free memory for stability](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning).
A shortage means there is not enough memory for the workload.
It is different from high utilization and from memory pressure (the kernel's reclaim activity, shown by [PSI](https://docs.kernel.org/accounting/psi.html)).
Use the [signals](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#memory-signals) and [patterns](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#memory-shortage-patterns) below to tell them apart,
and [how to fix](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#how-to-fix-memory-issues) to resolve it.

VictoriaMetrics components detect the available memory at startup as the smaller of the host RAM and the cgroup memory limit,

> and expose it as `vm_available_memory_bytes`. The actual usage is `process_resident_memory_bytes` (RSS):

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
and expose it as `vm_available_memory_bytes` [metric](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#monitoring). The actual memory usage (RSS) is exposed via `process_resident_memory_bytes` metric:
```

![VictoriaMetrics process memory model](troubleshooting-memory-model.webp)

RSS is the sum of anonymous memory (`process_resident_memory_anon_bytes`, not reclaimable) and the
file-backed OS page cache for the on-disk [data](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/#storage)
and [indexdb](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/#indexdb)
(`process_resident_memory_file_bytes`, reclaimable). Anonymous memory holds the VM caches
(`vm_cache_size_bytes`), the internal buffers, and the Go runtime memory: the Go heap
(`go_memstats_heap_inuse_bytes`), goroutine stacks, and runtime overhead.

`-memory.allowedPercent` (default 60%) or `-memory.allowedBytes` is a soft limit that sizes the VM caches
and internal buffers (the buffers are resident in the Go heap). It does not bound the rest of the Go

> runtime memory or the OS page cache. The container or cgroup limit is the hard limit: if RSS reaches it,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
runtime memory or the OS page cache. The container or cgroup limit is the hard limit: if the container allocates that much memory,
```

the process is [OOM-killed](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#out-of-memory-errors).

The Go heap grows with the current workload (queries, ingestion, merges) outside the soft limit, so a

> heavy load can push RSS to the hard limit and trigger an OOM kill even while the VM caches stay within the

Reviewer 2: This is incorrect and misleading. It is OK if RSS reaches the configured memory limit. It doesn't trigger OOM kill, since the OS can free up file-backed memory pages (aka pages from mmap-ed files). The OOM is triggered when the container requests from the OS the anonymous memory reaching the configured limit.  See the `Sidebar: When I think cgroups OOM is triggered` at https://utcc.utoronto.ca/~cks/space/blog/linux/OOMKillerWhen

Author: Right, I have rephrased it and described it properly.

  See also [this article](https://valyala.medium.com/how-to-optimize-promql-and-metricsql-queries-85a1b75bf986),
  which explains how to identify and optimize slow queries.

> ## Memory shortage

Reviewer: This section seem to be related to `troubleshooting/#out-of-memory-errors`. But still these are two different sections in this PR, not aligned together. 
I suggest to update or re-work the original `troubleshooting/#out-of-memory-errors` section instead, so documentation will remain aligned. Otherwise, we will get different sections written by different authors within one page about the same subject.

For example, in this section you explain how VM defines available memory. The rest sections of the document mention `available memory` term many times, but none of them is linking to this new section. This affects consistency of the documentation.

Author: Partly agree. But out-of-memory is narrower than that section. We couldn't integrate all the memory issues there. At the same time, we can't blindly include the out-of-memory section in the new section due to existing indexed links. 
Regarding redundancy, I really think it is OK for that document because users are never reading all these documents at once; they are using only relevant sections, and that's why it is better to keep them sufficient from a knowledge perspective. Wdyt?

Author: Done. Folded out-of-memory into Memory shortage - now a child of Memory signals as the terminal signal detected from outside the process. Causes moved where they belong (heavy queries to heap-bound, flags and capacity to How to fix). Kept the #out-of-memory-errors anchor and added inbound links from the FAQ and Slow data ingestion.

High memory utilization alone is not a shortage.
VictoriaMetrics components could operate normally under high memory utilization,
but it is recommended to have

> [50% headroom for stability](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning).

Reviewer 3: "up to 50%" or "at least 50%"? I think the former

Author: I get it from the capacity planning section, so it is up to 50% there.

> [at least 50% of free memory for stability](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning).

Reviewer: This sentence doesn't specify which memory should be accounted as 50% free.
"at least" sounds very restrictive, I'd remove it.

Author: For me, the problem is with the capacity planning section, not the current one. It is in my backlog. I am going to clarify it in a separate PR.

Author: Will be fixed separately in capacity planning docs

Before reacting, it is important to identify memory shortage — not enough memory for the workload —
apart from high utilization and memory pressure.
Memory pressure means the kernel reclaim activity shown by [PSI](https://docs.kernel.org/accounting/psi.html).
It could be an indicator of shortage. It is better to avoid memory pressure,

> because it puts a VictoriaMetrics component at risk of not getting enough memory, which can lead to a shortage.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
because it puts a VictoriaMetrics component at risk of not getting enough memory, which can lead to OOMs.
```

> because it puts a VictoriaMetrics component at risk of not getting enough memory, which can lead to OOMs.

Reviewer: I see this section detached from above sentences. It doesn't bring new info, only vague statements. I'd remove it for clarity.
It would be nice to mention sections below as a driver in decision making about mem shortage.

Author: It defines the approach for distinguishing storage from high memory usage. I see that most of our users do not distinguish between shortage, pressure, and high consumption, and they could affect them in different ways. The most important thing is that it could lead you to a different way to fix. I can make it more brief.

Author: Done. Tightened the intro and pointed it to the signals, patterns, and how-to-fix sections below as the decision driver.

### Memory resource accounting

> A component detects the memory available to it at startup as the smaller of the host RAM and the cgroup memory limit,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
VictoriaMetrics components detect the available memory at startup as the smaller of the host RAM and the cgroup memory limit,
```

> exposed as `vm_available_memory_bytes`. Its main observable parts are:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and expose it as `vm_available_memory_bytes` metric. Its main observable parts are:
```

1. Go (anonymous) memory — `process_resident_memory_anon_bytes`. It includes:

>    - A portion of total memory for caches, capped by `-memory.allowedPercent` (default 60%) or `-memory.allowedBytes`.

Reviewer: It is not used by caches (vmstorage, vmselect) only. 
- vmselect is also using it for controlling mem usage by queries
- vmagent uses it for limiting amount of in-memory blocks before putting them to the queue

Author: Honestly, that block is about vmstorage only, and I will think about expanding or narrowing it. Thanks for highlighting.

Author: Done. Lists what -memory.allowedPercent covers per component: vmstorage caches, vmselect query memory, vminsert/vmagent buffers, vmauth not sized by it.

Reviewer: I understand. I didn't mean to list all components. My point was that initial statement wasn't exactly correct.
I checked the change with listing all the components and I dont think we should explain it in such details. It is enough to say that  VM components are self-limiting themselves using `-memory.allowedBytes`.

I think, however, that this first paragraph is missing the point that even with self-limiting OOMs still could happen and that sections below will explain it in more details. Without this statement it is unclear why memory issues could happen at all if VM is limited with 60% of memory.

     The memory is used for in-process caches, for example `storage/tsid`, `indexdb` blocks and the rollup cache.
   - The Go heap, goroutine stacks, anonymous off-heap allocations, and runtime overhead used for ingestion and queries.

>      Only the cache part is capped by `-memory.allowedPercent`. The Go heap grows on top of it under load.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

Reviewer: I don't see why we need to mention it again, as it was just mentioned in the previous option

> 1. OS page cache for mmap-ed data and index files — the memory left after the cache budget,

Reviewer 3: We don't have a metric directly observing this part, `process_resident_memory_file_bytes` is just the part of it?

Reviewer 3: Also, not sure what "the memory left after the cache budget" means here - is it available memory minus previous (Go) memory?

Author: Reworded. process_resident_memory_file_bytes is the resident page cache for the on-disk data and indexdb; dropped 'the memory left after the cache budget'.

> 1. OS page cache for mmap-ed data and index files — the OS uses the memory not taken by the cache budget or the Go heap,

Reviewer: what's index files?
I am not sure if we need to mention mmap at all. Only component that uses it is vmselect, so this knowledge has low impact.

Would it be better to mention `process_resident_memory_bytes` as a cumulative mem usage that includes page cache and go internal mem instead?

Author: Done. Dropped mmap, named on-disk data and indexdb with links, and the accounting starts from process_resident_memory_bytes split into anonymous and file-backed parts.

   and reclaims it as needed. `process_resident_memory_file_bytes` shows the part of these file-backed pages
   currently resident for the process, so it is a lower bound on the useful page cache.

Before tuning and troubleshooting memory issues,
see [Best practices](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/bestpractices/#memory)
for memory configuration guidance. Be sure that `GOMEMLIMIT` is not set,
and that the [VPA](https://github.com/kubernetes/autoscaler/tree/master/vertical-pod-autoscaler) is not used for `vmstorage` pods.

> ### Signals

Reviewer: `# Signals` anchor could be misleading as a part of the link 
`https://docs.victoriametrics.com/troubleshooting/#signals` as it points at `signals` when in fact these signals belong to `memory` section.

See example of a good link - https://docs.victoriametrics.com/troubleshooting/#out-of-memory-errors

Author: Done, renamed to Memory signals.

> These metrics describe how a component uses memory and are visible on the

Reviewer: This section should mention https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/#monitoring so readers can read how to monitor VM components and where signals below are coming from.

Author: Done, linked #monitoring in the signals intro.

[official Grafana dashboards for VictoriaMetrics](https://grafana.com/orgs/victoriametrics/dashboards).

> None of them means a shortage on its own — the next section reads them together.

Reviewer: > None of them means a shortage on its own — the next section reads them together.

It is unclear what `next section` is: text below or next # anchor. If it is next anchor - please link it.

Author: Done, linked Memory shortage patterns explicitly.

- `process_resident_memory_anon_bytes` / `vm_available_memory_bytes` — anonymous memory (caches plus Go heap)

>   as a share of the available memory. This is the unreclaimable side, without OS page cache.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
  as a share of the available memory. This memory can't be reclaimed back by OS.
```

- `process_resident_memory_file_bytes` — the process's resident file-backed memory for mmap-ed data and index files.

>   It is reclaimable and is a lower bound on the useful page cache.

Reviewer: > is a lower bound on the useful page cache.

I don't understand this part

Author: Removed it. It is now just the page cache resident for the process.

- `process_pressure_memory_waiting_seconds_total`, `process_pressure_memory_stalled_seconds_total` —
  [PSI](https://docs.kernel.org/accounting/psi.html): time tasks were stalled waiting for memory reclaim.
  Populated only on Linux hosts with PSI support.

- `vm_cache_size_bytes` and `vm_cache_size_max_bytes` (per `type`, e.g. `storage/tsid`) —
  current and maximum size of each in-process cache. Their ratio shows how full a cache is.

> - `vm_slow_row_inserts_total` vs `vm_rows_added_to_storage_total` —

Reviewer: >`vm_slow_row_inserts_total` vs `vm_rows_added_to_storage_total` —

By `vs` you mean ratio? If yes, please state explicitly  and consistent with other signals. Instead of ratio it is better to provide the example, to avoid confusion if user will use wrong denominator. 

For signals that are part of our alerting rules it might make sense to refernce these rules, or mention their existence at least once.

Author: Done, all ratios now use / explicitly with both metrics named. I wouldn't link to alert here, I think it is redundant honestly

  share of ingested rows that missed the `storage/tsid` cache ([slow inserts](#slow-data-ingestion)).

> - `increase(vm_new_timeseries_created_total[24h])` vs the number of

Reviewer 3: Its weird to see an app-level metric among OS/runtime-level ones

Author: Agree, but it needs to be used within that scope. I would say it is highly recommended to mitigate these kinds of issues, because if you do not decrease the cardinality, we can drop part of that section and just recommend always increasing resources.

Reviewer 3: Perhaps it should be moved below - as it suggests an entirely different approach

Author: Honestly, I want to keep it here to highlight that it is an indispensable part of the process for resolving the memory shortage issue.

  [active time series](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-an-active-time-series) —
  the [churn rate](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-high-churn-rate):
  new series registered over a day relative to the active set.

- `process_major_pagefaults_total` — rate of pages read from disk (page-cache misses, refaults, or swap-in).

- `go_memstats_heap_inuse_bytes` and the `CPU spent on GC` panel — the Go heap working set and the CPU cost of garbage collection.

### Shortage patterns

There are three patterns of memory shortage:

> 1. **The cache cannot hold the active series (cache-bound).** The `storage/tsid` cache is full:

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **The cache cannot hold the active series (cache-bound shortage).** The `storage/tsid` cache is full:
```

cache-bound shortage, not cache-bound series

> 1. **The cache cannot hold the active series (cache-bound shortage).** The `storage/tsid` cache is full:

Reviewer: It seems incosistent to me to explain the same thing here and at `troubleshooting/#slow-data-ingestion` but with different words. It will lead to inconsistency in future.

It also mentions `indexdb-rotation repopulation` which is not a thing to the user. They're not aware of it and this section doesn't explain it either.

Author: Done. Dropped the indexdb-rotation mention; points to Slow data ingestion for the detail.

>    `vm_cache_size_bytes{type="storage/tsid"}` is close to `vm_cache_size_max_bytes`, and slow inserts stay high.

Reviewer 4: ```
is close to `vm_cache_size_max_bytes{type="storage/tsid"}`
```

Author: Fixed

>    Most sustained slow inserts are caused by `storage/tsid` cache misses.

Reviewer: Term `sustained` is not used in VM docs, or in other technical docs. It stumbled me while reading this, I assume it could be unexpected/hard-to-explain for other readers too. This term is used 3 times in this PR and never used in the rest of docs.

Author: Done, removed sustained.

   The main sources are new series and misses on already-known active series.
   `indexdb`-rotation repopulation can also contribute to `vm_slow_row_inserts_total`,

>    but it usually appears as a time-bound spike around rotation, not as a sustained high slow-inserts rate.

Reviewer 4: Better to tell when the rotation will happen(last hour of the day). For most users they might see the spike but weren't sure if it was caused by rotation.

Author: Dropped the indexdb-rotation mention entirely, so this no longer applies.

>    If slow inserts stay above 5% of ingested rows during a stable window without restarts or rerouting

Reviewer 3: I wonder if its worth having an alert on this?

Author: TooHighSlowInsertsRate, yes!

>    and cannot be roughly explained by `rate(vm_new_timeseries_created_total)` plus `rate(vm_timeseries_repopulated_total)`,

Reviewer 4: From users perspective, what dose "vm_timeseries_repopulated_total" mean? We didn't explain it in ###Signals section.

Reviewer 4: And I think `vm_timeseries_repopulated_total` is unrelated to memory. It will increase when
1. tsid is found in tsid-cache
2. The tsid is from another partition indexdb, so the MetricID cannot be found in the current partition

So we need to repopylate it in current partition

Author: Agreed, it is not a memory signal. Removed it.

   it points to misses on active series that no longer fit the cache.
   See the detailed explanation in the [Slow data ingestion](#slow-data-ingestion) section.

> 1. **The Go heap outgrows its budget (heap-bound).** `go_memstats_heap_inuse_bytes` climbs well above its stable baseline.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
1. **The Go heap exceeds its budget (heap-bound shortage).** `go_memstats_heap_inuse_bytes` climbs well above its stable baseline.
```

   Check it together with the non-cache part of anonymous memory:
   `process_resident_memory_anon_bytes` minus the component's `vm_cache_size_bytes`.
   There is no fixed normal value, so compare against the component's own stable history.
   A `process_resident_memory_anon_bytes / vm_available_memory_bytes` ratio that keeps rising leaves little headroom
   and may lead to an [OOM kill](#out-of-memory-errors).

>    If heap growth tracks query or ingestion load, it is workload-driven.

Reviewer: A similar to `sustained` case: `If heap growth tracks query load`. This sentence has ambigious meaning and is rarely used in tech docs. It is never used in VM docs. It has an extra layer of meaning above `correlates` word.

Author: Done, changed to correlates with

>    If it grows regardless of load, suspect a memory leak and collect a heap profile.

Reviewer: Also recommend to report is a bug: [file a bug report](https://github.com/VictoriaMetrics/VictoriaMetrics/issues/new)

Author: Done, added the file-a-bug-report link.

1. **The OS page cache is too small (I/O-bound shortage).** `process_major_pagefaults_total` rises above the component's baseline

>    and `process_resident_memory_file_bytes` shrinks or stays too small for the working set,

Reviewer: > `process_resident_memory_file_bytes` shrinks or stays too small for the working set

It took me some time to understand this. `working set` is not defined, it is unclear what it is until you mention it 2 lines below. 
And I don't understand why process_resident_memory_file_bytes would shrink during pagefault. 

It seem to me that constant anomaly high high rate of `process_major_pagefaults_total` might alone idetnify memory shortage for page cache. I don't understand how checking process_resident_memory_file_bytes would help me to make another decision.

Author: I do not clearly understand what your proposal is here. So it is reworked. process_major_pagefaults_total is the main signal, process_resident_memory_file_bytes is secondary, dropped working set, noted swap causes the same symptoms.

   while disk reads and query latency grow.
   The file working set (data and index parts) no longer fits the memory left for the page cache.
   Add memory according to
   [capacity planning](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning).

> PSI is an additional confirmation signal: rising `process_pressure_memory_*` means the kernel is reclaiming memory for the cgroup.

Reviewer 3: I think we should copy PSI recommendations in every point / put this line before to showcase that having PSI metrics is always more useful than not

Author: I see that PSI could be overrated in terms of shortage. It could highlight a shortage of containers, but that doesn't mean it is affecting the application itself. So I couldn't find a way to describe it better than it is.

Reviewer 3: Ah, so app-level metrics would pinpoint the issue better than generic PSI metrics - and we want to leave those as additional confirming factor? Sounds good

Where PSI is unavailable, rely on the per-pattern signals above.

### How to fix

After distinguishing the shortage from normal high memory utilization, and if it is sustained,
you can use the approaches below to resolve it:

- reduce the number of [active time series](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-an-active-time-series)
  or the [churn rate](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-high-churn-rate) —
  see [Slow data ingestion](#slow-data-ingestion).
- increase the memory budget — see capacity planning for
  [single-node VictoriaMetrics](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning)
  and the [cluster version](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/cluster-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning).

>   Scaling memory is preferred over tuning individual caches, as covered in [Out of memory errors](#out-of-memory-errors).

Reviewer 3: Vertical scaling?

Author: Clarified

  See also [this article](https://valyala.medium.com/how-to-optimize-promql-and-metricsql-queries-85a1b75bf986),
  which explains how to identify and optimize slow queries.

## Memory shortage

High memory utilization alone does not indicate a shortage.
A VictoriaMetrics component can operate normally under high memory utilization,
but it is recommended to keep [at least 50% of free memory for stability](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning).
A shortage means there is not enough memory for the workload.
It is different from high utilization and from memory pressure (the kernel's reclaim activity, shown by [PSI](https://docs.kernel.org/accounting/psi.html)).
Use the [signals](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#memory-signals) and [patterns](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#memory-shortage-patterns) below to tell them apart,

> and [how to fix](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#how-to-fix-memory-issues) to resolve it.

Reviewer 5: This is extremely dense and compact, and I don't think is giving enough context to easily understand what we want to convey here. I think I prefer something longer and more structured, like this:

```suggestion
A memory shortage is often confused with two other states that look similar on dashboards,
but only one of them requires action:

- **High memory utilization** - the component occupies a large share of the available memory. This is expected by design:
  VictoriaMetrics uses spare memory for its in-process caches and the OS page cache to speed up ingestion and queries.
  Much of it is reclaimable, so a component can run in this state indefinitely without degradation. Still, keep
  [at least 50% of free memory for stability](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/single-server-victoriametrics/#capacity-planning), so workload spikes have room.

- **Memory pressure** - the kernel is reclaiming memory: it evicts file-backed pages and stalls the tasks waiting for memory,
  as reported by [PSI](https://docs.kernel.org/accounting/psi.html). Short spikes are normal; sustained pressure means
  memory is becoming scarce, though the component may still keep up with the workload.

- **Memory shortage** - there is not enough memory for the current workload: caches no longer hold the
  [active time series](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/faq/#what-is-an-active-time-series) and ingestion slows down,
  queries read from disk instead of the page cache, or the process is [OOM-killed](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#out-of-memory-errors).
  Unlike the states above, it always degrades performance or availability and must be fixed.

Read the [memory signals](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#memory-signals) below to see how a component uses memory,
match them against the [memory shortage patterns](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#memory-shortage-patterns),
and follow [how to fix memory issues](https://docs.victoriametrics.com/victoriametrics/troubleshooting/#how-to-fix-memory-issues) if it is indeed a shortage.
```

Author: I agree that the text is too dense, so I will split it into shorter paragraphs. I will not use the proposed definitions. Memory pressure may also need action. High memory use is not always safe, and a memory shortage is not always caused by the active-series cache. The sections below describe the separate cases.
